Added modelling 101 blog (#72)
statelyai/eng-blog: content/posts/2022-02-14-modelling-101-how-to-build-a-statechart-from-scratch.mdx

---
title: "Modelling 101: How to build a statechart from scratch"
description: Stately dev Matt Pocock takes you through a step-by-step guide on modelling statecharts
tags:
  - xstate
  - tutorial
  - statechart
  - modelling
author:
  - Matt Pocock
originalURL: ""
excerpt: "Modelling using statecharts changed my career as a dev. Today, I’m going to share an opinionated, step-by-step guide for building statecharts from scratch."

> publishedAt: "2022-02-14"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
publishedAt: "2022-02-15"
```

---

Modelling using statecharts changed my career as a dev. Of all the state management solutions I’ve tried, it feels the most complete, logical and robust. Even if you don’t use them in your app’s code, statecharts let you break down complex features into states, events, services, actions and guards.

It took me a long time to get comfortable modelling with statecharts. Even when I’d learned all the terms, it took time to work out a step-by-step process for building statecharts from scratch.

Today, I’m going to share **an opinionated, step-by-step guide for building statecharts from scratch**. This process _works for me_, but it might not work for you. Feel free to tweak it as you go.

## What you’ll need

1. A pen and paper, or a digital notepad of some kind
2. A statechart builder, such as [our visual editor](https://stately.ai/editor) or an XState machine in our [XState visualizer](https://stately.ai/viz)
3. A clear idea of what you’re building. Maybe something you’ve implemented at work? You could also pick something from [XState Catalogue](https://xstate-catalogue.com).

> I’ve also build this [process as a statechart](https://stately.ai/registry/editor/d24479eb-ac20-44ae-a7b7-c0910e6247ad), on our visual editor.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I’ve also built this [process as a statechart](https://stately.ai/registry/editor/d24479eb-ac20-44ae-a7b7-c0910e6247ad) using our visual editor.
```

- User submits form

For a spreadsheet:

- User clicks a cell on the spreadsheet
- User holds down the `shift`/`ctrl` key
- User presses `escape`
- User scrolls up or down

Seeing all the events in a big list may start giving you an idea of what is possible in your statechart. You might start thinking in terms of _sequences of events_ — i.e. `User changes input` -> `User submits form`. Write down any sequences that pop into your head, they’ll be useful later.

## 2. List all the possible tasks

Next, it’s important to consider the _tasks_ your app needs to perform. These tasks could be called ‘side effects’ — things that happen as a result of your statechart running. These could be as diverse as:

1. **Adding an item to a todo list (in local state)**
2. **Sending a request to the API to load some data**
3. **Focusing an input**
4. **Waiting for a video to load**
5. **Subscribing to something for updates** (perhaps via `window.addEventListener()`)

_NOTE: I’m using ‘tasks’ loosely. This isn’t an official term in the XState docs — but ‘services’ and ‘actions’ are._

Once you have a list of tasks, you need to divide them into two groups.

### 2a. Services

> The first group is for services, tasks where you need to _do something when they finish_. I wrote a [longer guide about this distinction here](/blog/should-this-be-an-action-or-a-service).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The first group is for services, tasks where you need to _do something when they finish_. I wrote a [longer guide about the distinction between actions and services here](/blog/should-this-be-an-action-or-a-service).
```

Here, it’s a little different — when you subscribe to something, you need to clean up the listener to prevent a memory leak. For instance:

```ts
const listener = () => {
  console.log("Hello!");
};

// Subscribe
window.addEventListener("focus", listener);

// Unsubscribe
window.removeEventListener("focus", listener);
```

Here, we care about the outcome because we need to _run something at the end of the process_ — i.e. unsubscribe from the listener.

#### Adding onDone/onError events

Service completions/errors are handled _as events_ in your statechart, meaning they’re on the same level as your user clicking buttons.

When you’ve got your list of services, note down two things:

For each service that we need to wait for it to complete, add a `serviceName.onDone` event to your list.

For each service that might reasonably be expected to error, add a `serviceName.onError` event to your list.

### 2b. Actions

The second group is for actions, tasks that you can ‘fire and forget’. Unlike services, the statechart forgets about actions as soon as they’re fired.

From our list above, these are actions:

1. **Adding an item to a todo list (in local state)**

> Changes to local state are pretty much always fire-and-forget. The reason is that, since we manage the local state ourselves, making updates to it is instant. [XState’s assign action](https://xstate.js.org/docs/guides/context.html#assign-action) is a good example.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Changes to local state are pretty much always fire-and-forget. The reason is that, since we manage the local state ourselves, updating it is instant. [XState’s assign action](https://xstate.js.org/docs/guides/context.html#assign-action) is a good example.
```

2. **Focusing an input**

Focusing an input, in the same vein, is fire-and-forget. We don’t care about the outcome, and it’s unlikely to fail.

## 3. Work out the very first state

Now that you know _what can happen_ (events) and _what can be done_ (actions & services) in your statechart, it’s time to start adding some states.

### 3a. Know your statechart’s lifecycle

It’s always easiest to start at the beginning. Before you add your first state, consider the moment that your statechart gets initiated. What causes your statechart to run? Some examples:

> An **authentication** statechart, which manages the state for if the user is logged in to a website or not. This would be started the _first moment_ the user clicks onto any page of your app, and finished when they close your app.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An **authentication** statechart, which manages the state for whether the user is logged in to a website or not. This would be started the _first moment_ the user clicks on to any page of your app, and finished when they close your app.
```

A **sign up form** statechart, which handles a user signing up to your app. This might be started when the user visits the `/sign-up` route, and stopped when they exit it.

### 3b. Write down your first state

Now that you know what your app looks like when your statechart gets initiated, it’s time to name its initial state. Consider what the statechart is doing at that time. It could be `Loading data`, or `Waiting for user to submit form`, or even just `Idle`, waiting for something to happen.

#### Dynamic initial states

> Every statechart _must_ have an initial state, and it can’t be dynamic — i.e. it must be the same every time your statechart runs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Every statechart _must_ have an initial state, and it can’t be dynamic — it must be the same every time your statechart runs.
```

> If you feel your statechart _does_ have more than one initial state (i.e. it could start in two different modes) consider using a ‘checking’ state via an [eventless transition](https://xstate.js.org/docs/guides/transitions.html#eventless-always-transitions).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you feel your statechart _does_ have more than one initial state (for instance it could start in two different modes) consider using a ‘checking’ state via an [eventless transition](https://xstate.js.org/docs/guides/transitions.html#eventless-always-transitions).
```

## 4. Build out the states

Now that you have your first state, you can start the process of building out the states. Every state represents a length of time, so consider _what is happening_ during that state.

### 4a. Work out if any tasks are running

> Do you have any services running? If so, _invoke_ those services using [XState’s invoke](https://xstate.js.org/docs/guides/communication.html#invoking-services) property.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Do you have any services running? If so, _invoke_ those services using [XState’s invoke property](https://xstate.js.org/docs/guides/communication.html#invoking-services).
```

### 4b. Work out which events can happen in that state

Consider the period of time your state represents. Which events should _do_ something, and what should they do?

#### Events that change state

If an event results in:

1. A new service running
2. Something new appearing on screen
3. Other types of events becoming possible
4. A current service stopping

Then it might need to move to a new state. A great example is a **data fetcher**. Your app is in two distinct states:

- **Fetching data**: it doesn’t yet have the data, and the ‘fetch data’ service is running.
- **Showing data**: it has the data, and is showing it on screen. The ‘fetch data’ service has stopped.

If you have an event like this, draw out the new event and either create a new state, or make it target an existing one if needed.

#### Events that don’t change state

Sometimes, [events can be used to fire an action](https://xstate.js.org/docs/guides/actions.html#api) instead of changing state. A good example of this is when a form input changes, and you need to save the new value to local state.

> This is called a [self-transition](https://xstate.js.org/docs/guides/transitions.html#self-transitions), where the event doesn’t change the state — i.e. the state transitions to itself.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is called a [self-transition](https://xstate.js.org/docs/guides/transitions.html#self-transitions), where the event doesn’t change the state — the state transitions to itself.
```

#### Events that do nothing

It’s important to bear in mind that when your statechart is in a certain state, _only the events that you specify_ will be handled. In other words, any event you don’t specify will do _nothing_ when it’s sent to the statechart.

A classic example of this is a form. When you submit the form, you go to the ‘submitting’ state. It’s important that you don’t allow the ‘submit’ event to be received while in the ‘submitting’ state — otherwise the form might get sent twice!

## 5. Keep going!

Once you’ve figured out which actions/services are running in which states, and what all the events do, you’ve modelled your first state! You’ll likely have states which branch off your initial state — so go through those one-by-one and build them out.

You can also leave parts of your statechart unimplemented, and dive into building the frontend/actions/services before returning to modelling again.

I’ve found this approach really useful when getting to grips with what my app does. You can even use a statechart as an early validation tool to confirm that what you’re building is correct.

> If you’ve got any more questions, do join our [Discord](https://discord.gg/invite/xstate) and ask in the ‘modelling-help’ channel.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you’ve got any more questions, do [join our Discord](https://discord.gg/invite/xstate) and ask in the ‘modelling-help’ channel.
```
